Rust 1.41.1 announcement (#525)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2020-02-27-Rust-1.41.1.md

---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rust 1.41.1"
author: The Rust Release Team
release: true
---

The Rust team has published a new point release of Rust, 1.41.1.
Rust is a programming language that is empowering everyone to build reliable and efficient software.

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via rustup, getting Rust 1.41.1 is as easy as:

> ```console

Reviewer: This isn't feedback, more of a question. Is `console` now the preferred marker for CLI instructions? Is there any meaningful difference?

rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`][install] from the appropriate page on our website.

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install

## What's in 1.41.1 stable

Rust 1.41.1 addresses two critical regressions introduced in Rust 1.41.0:
a soundness hole related to static lifetimes, and a miscompilation causing segfaults.

> These regressions are not affecting past releases of Rust,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These regressions do not affect earlier releases of Rust,
```

> These regressions are not affecting past releases of Rust,

Reviewer 3: Well, that's not really true -- the latest reproducer on https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/69225 goes back to 1.38, as long as we've been using LLVM 9.

Author: cc @pietroalbini

Reviewer 4: Uh, woops.

and we recommend users of Rust 1.41.0 to upgrade as soon as possible.
Another issue, related to interactions between `'static` and `Copy` implementations,
dating back to Rust 1.0, was also addressed by this release.

### A soundness hole in checking `static` items

In Rust 1.41.0, due to some changes in the internal representation of `static` values,

> the borrow checker accidentally allowed some unsound programs.

Author: Why break the paragraph here? The next sentence is connected to the former.

> the borrow checker accidentally allowed some unsound programs.

Reviewer 5: The paragraph felt a little long to me personally, I thought it was easier to follow with a break. Not a strong opinion, though.

> the borrow checker accidentally allowed some unsound programs.

Author: I see. I would prefer to keep it as-is as I think it's short enough and the sentences are closely connected.

This in turn would allow the assignment of a temporary,
with a lifetime less than `'static`, to a `static` variable:

```rust
static mut MY_STATIC: &'static u8 = &0;

fn main() {
    let my_temporary = 42;
    unsafe {
        // Erroneously allowed in 1.41.0:
        MY_STATIC = &my_temporary;
    }
}
```

This was addressed in 1.41.1, with the program failing to compile:
```
error[E0597]: `my_temporary` does not live long enough
 --> src/main.rs:6:21
  |
6 |         MY_STATIC = &my_temporary;
  |         ------------^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  |         |           |
  |         |           borrowed value does not live long enough
  |         assignment requires that `my_temporary` is borrowed for `'static`
7 |     }
8 | }
  | - `my_temporary` dropped here while still borrowed

```

You can learn more about this bug in [issue #69114][69114] and the [PR that fixed it][pr_69145].

[69114]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/69114
[pr_69145]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/69145

### Respecting a `'static` lifetime in a `Copy` implementation

[1.40.0_post]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2019/12/19/Rust-1.40.0.html#borrow-check-migration-warnings-are-hard-errors-in-rust-2015

> Ever since Rust 1.0, the following erroneous program has been compiling:

Reviewer 6: Although from 1.31-1.36 it warned on the 2018 edition. (Not sure that this is relevant)

Author: Too much detail I think -- I had an exposition of the hole plugged in 1.40.0 without the projection but we cut it for a more direct approach.

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
struct Foo<'a>(&'a u32);
impl Copy for Foo<'static> {}

fn main() {
    let temporary = 2;
    let foo = (Foo(&temporary),);
    drop(foo.0); // Accessing a part of `foo` is necessary.
    drop(foo.0); // Indexing an array would also work.
}
```

In Rust 1.41.1, this issue was fixed [by the same PR as the one above][pr_69145].

> Compiling the program now produces the following error:

Reviewer 5: I've been out of the loop lately, but I can't find any crater runs for this. Maybe it's worth mentioning whether any code was doing this on crates.io?

Author: I don't think we have one.

```rust

error[E0597]: `temporary` does not live long enough
  --> src/main.rs:7:20
   |
7  |     let foo = (Foo(&temporary),);
   |                    ^^^^^^^^^^ borrowed value does not live long enough
8  |     drop(foo.0);
   |          ----- copying this value requires that
   |                `temporary` is borrowed for `'static`
9  |     drop(foo.0);
10 | }
   | - `temporary` dropped here while still borrowed
```

> This happens because `Foo<'a>`, for some `'a`, only implements `Copy` when `'a: 'static`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an error because `Foo<'a>`, for some `'a`, only implements `Copy` when `'a: 'static`.
```

I thought "this happens because..." was going to explain the original cause of the bug; I think this is a clearer transition.

Author: ```suggestion
This error occurs because `Foo<'a>`, for some `'a`, only implements `Copy` when `'a: 'static`.
```
